[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Unknown]: Are you a government-approved journalist?
[Amit Varma]: One of them thundered.
[Unknown]: Where is your license?
[Amit Varma]: What license, I said? Why license? Why should I take your approval?
[Amit Varma]: He replied,
[Unknown]: Because I am your my bap.
[Unknown]: I will decide what you read.
[Unknown]: I will decide what you write.
[Unknown]: I will decide what you eat and drink.
[Unknown]: I am your ruler. You are my subject.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, no, I protested.
[Amit Varma]: It's not supposed to be like this.
[Amit Varma]: The government is supposed to serve the people, not the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: I should be regulating you chaps, not the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: He turned to one of his seven-foot security guards and said,
[Unknown]: Ha ha ha ha, this fool is rambling.
[Unknown]: Take him away and lock him up.
[Unknown]: And when he wakes up, feed him only sugar.
[Amit Varma]: Fine, I said. Lock me up now.
[Amit Varma]: But one day, I will fight back with a podcast,
[Amit Varma]: and we will all wake up from this bad dream.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I am recording this episode on Friday, May 11th,
[Amit Varma]: and yesterday on May 10th,
[Amit Varma]: I was part of a panel discussion on online content regulation
[Amit Varma]: that was organized by Medianama and hosted by my friend Nikhil Pawar.
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil cares deeply about this issue,
[Amit Varma]: but he chose to play devil's advocate on the panel
[Amit Varma]: and asked some piercing questions to opponents of content regulation,
[Amit Varma]: like me, which shows how rigorously he's thought through this subject.
[Amit Varma]: So here he is, and here I am.
[Guest]: Welcome to the show, Nikhil.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit. Glad to be back on the show.
[Guest]: We've had a couple of fun discussions,
[Guest]: so looking forward to another one.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I have a feeling that Modiji and Smriti Iraniji
[Amit Varma]: listened to our last show, which we did on the future of the internet,
[Amit Varma]: and they thought, okay, here is a problem.
[Amit Varma]: We will offer a solution.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore they offered to regulate us for our own good,
[Amit Varma]: which is what yesterday's panel discussion was about.
[Guest]: What do you feel about that?
[Guest]: Well, you know, I think it's a tricky situation for any government to be in
[Guest]: because their very existence is challenged by these subversive ideas
[Guest]: such as free speech and people having a voice of their own.
[Guest]: So, you know, like you, I started Medianama with no license required.
[Guest]: It took me two weeks at that point in time,
[Guest]: and most of that was spent in my attempts at designing a site before we launched
[Guest]: because a domain name just costs 500 bucks.
[Guest]: Hosting with an automated WordPress setup costs 500 bucks,
[Guest]: and therefore that gives everyone the opportunity
[Guest]: and the right to communicate to anyone who wants to read them.
[Guest]: So we find our own audience in that sense, right?
[Guest]: You found yours, I found mine, and that freedom is what I deeply cherish.
[Guest]: We're reaching a situation now where as more and more people come online,
[Guest]: there is fear about what if those people had their own voice
[Guest]: and other people and, you know, millions of others could hear what they have to say.
[Guest]: And we've seen this particularly in India if you think about it
[Guest]: when it comes to stand-up comedy.
[Guest]: Just like in the U.S., stand-up comedy has been, you know,
[Guest]: a means of dissemination of news and also liberal thought.
[Guest]: I think that's what's happened in India as well because, let's face it,
[Guest]: us journalists are incredibly boring,
[Guest]: and stand-up comedians have a better way of getting that message across.
[Guest]: So I don't think it's just stand-up comedy, but, you know,
[Guest]: the ability of people to, let's say, put the truth out there
[Guest]: is something which scares those who want to control that messaging,
[Guest]: and we've seen that happening globally.
[Amit Varma]: It's interesting you mentioned that, you know, when I started my blog,
[Amit Varma]: when you started MediaNama, we were just free to sort of start it
[Amit Varma]: without having to worry about a license or regulation or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And that was kind of by default because this was a new technology.
[Amit Varma]: The government's philosophy always has been to treat its people as its subjects
[Amit Varma]: and regulate everything, every action that you possibly can.
[Amit Varma]: And because no one saw the, they didn't see the internet coming,
[Amit Varma]: they didn't see this revolution which puts the tools of publishing
[Amit Varma]: in the hands of users coming, that to begin with it wasn't regulated.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise traditional media is heavily regulated,
[Amit Varma]: free speech in any case is heavily policed,
[Amit Varma]: and we were just lucky that this was new technology,
[Amit Varma]: and by the time they figured out we'd already started
[Amit Varma]: and things had gathered their own momentum.
[Guest]: But now they're making up for lost time.
[Guest]: Just to give some context about how old both of us are,
[Guest]: if you go back to 2006, there was this instance
[Guest]: where all blogs in the country were blocked.
[Guest]: There was an order for blocking all WordPress.com sites,
[Guest]: all Blogspot, Typepad, and that was an order that the government issued
[Guest]: for blocking certain blogs which they were worried about.
[Guest]: And the ISPs did not have any means of blocking a particular subdomain
[Guest]: of a domain and therefore they blocked everything.
[Guest]: And I think a bunch of us actually led that effort in fighting back.
[Guest]: So that was my first sort of interface with some kind of activism for free speech
[Guest]: even before I'd started journalism.
[Amit Varma]: I remember fighting vigorously because my blog at that time, IndiaUncut,
[Amit Varma]: before it shifted to its own domain, IndiaUncut.com,
[Guest]: was on IndiaUncut.Blogspot.com.
[Amit Varma]: So that got blocked as well, and what really happened was
[Amit Varma]: they wanted to block some random something-something.Blogspot.com
[Amit Varma]: and they blocked all of Blogspot.
[Amit Varma]: Fought back and that kind of got sorted out,
[Amit Varma]: but one of the things we realized at that time, if you remember,
[Amit Varma]: and the government has that power to this day,
[Amit Varma]: is that they can issue orders to ISPs to block any site
[Amit Varma]: and there is no recourse, you cannot appeal.
[Amit Varma]: So if someone goes to IndiaUncut, which of course isn't active,
[Amit Varma]: I just archive my stuff there now, but back in the days when I was blogging,
[Amit Varma]: and looks at the name and says IndiaUncut,
[Amit Varma]: this is definitely a porn site, block it.
[Amit Varma]: Then I have no recourse, I can't fight back,
[Amit Varma]: and that kind of remains the case to this day,
[Amit Varma]: where as citizens, like 69A of the IT Act,
[Amit Varma]: and we'll talk about the IT Act, I'm going to ask you about that,
[Amit Varma]: has that where the government can block any website and there's no recourse?
[Guest]: Well, I wrote a post on this a few years ago,
[Guest]: which is a simple, human kind of a point of view saying,
[Guest]: I don't know, because what happens is when sites get blocked
[Guest]: because of the nature of the work that we do at MediaNama,
[Guest]: lots of people ping us to check, is this blocked?
[Guest]: Are you able to access this?
[Guest]: And then we go through this entire exercise of asking on social media,
[Guest]: can you tell us if you're able to access this site
[Guest]: and respond with details of your city and your ISP?
[Guest]: And so we have this crazy situation where 20% of the people
[Guest]: or sometimes 40% of the people are saying, yes, it's blocked,
[Guest]: and the rest are saying that it's not blocked.
[Guest]: And so I don't know whether a site is blocked.
[Guest]: I don't know why it's been blocked.
[Guest]: I don't know who asked for it to be blocked.
[Guest]: I don't know how long it's going to be blocked for.
[Guest]: When is the block going to be removed?
[Guest]: And so one of the things that we expect
[Guest]: and we should demand of our government is transparency.
[Guest]: If there is speech being curtailed,
[Guest]: and if there are legitimate reasons for it,
[Guest]: whether if it's a court order,
[Guest]: whether if it's due to some national security issue,
[Guest]: if my site gets blocked, don't I have the right to know?
[Guest]: And so, unfortunately, no one's challenged
[Guest]: this secret blocking in court yet,
[Guest]: but there is really no disclosure.
[Guest]: So therefore, we can't hold the government to account.
[Guest]: Whereas, for example, in Kuwait, if a site gets blocked,
[Guest]: there is a page that pops up which indicates
[Guest]: that the page has been blocked on order from so-and-so,
[Guest]: and it gives an email address to contact for more information,
[Guest]: hypothetically for also the block to be removed.
[Guest]: I remember before the 66A case,
[Guest]: I remember talking to a particular site called Mobango.
[Guest]: So the shadi.com guys had bought Mobango,
[Guest]: which was an app store similar to the Google Play Store,
[Guest]: and it was blocked in India.
[Guest]: And they didn't know why it's been blocked.
[Guest]: They didn't know who to contact.
[Guest]: So they went running around trying to figure out.
[Guest]: And for six months, it was blocked,
[Amit Varma]: and they didn't know what to do.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a company with deep coffers.
[Amit Varma]: So if they face this...
[Amit Varma]: No, which is what I was thinking that, you know, you and I can...
[Guest]: Do you know how many sites are blocked in India?
[Guest]: No, tell me.
[Unknown]: Neither do I. Nobody knows.
[Unknown]: That's the point, right?
[Guest]: So how do we hold our governments to account
[Amit Varma]: if there is no transparency from them?
[Amit Varma]: No, and here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: You and I can speak out about it
[Amit Varma]: because we are incredibly privileged in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that we have the platforms, we can organize outrage,
[Amit Varma]: we might be able to put together the resources to even fight legally.
[Amit Varma]: But the common citizen doesn't have all of these things.
[Amit Varma]: So if somebody starts a blog and it's blocked,
[Amit Varma]: there's literally nothing he can do.
[Amit Varma]: He's up against a wall.
[Amit Varma]: He can't even express himself on this matter.
[Guest]: So around those days, there was an attack from Anonymous India,
[Guest]: which was, we don't know who they are,
[Guest]: some anonymous bunch of hackers
[Guest]: that hacked into a mobile operator's logs
[Guest]: and found a list of blog posts and blogs
[Guest]: that had been blocked by the ISP itself
[Guest]: and they were essentially critical of the parent company of that ISP.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So there was private censorship that was going on,
[Guest]: but nobody knew about it.
[Guest]: And so here's the thing, right?
[Guest]: Quite often if a page is blocked,
[Guest]: you go and you get a 404 error saying that this page is not accessible.
[Guest]: How do you know whether it's a technical issue
[Guest]: or it is actually a block?
[Guest]: Sometimes you get a standard response saying
[Guest]: this website has been blocked on orders from Department of Telecommunications.
[Guest]: Why has the Department of Telecommunications asked for it to be blocked?
[Guest]: We don't know.
[Guest]: I think the point here is that, you know,
[Guest]: why we're having this discussion about online content regulation
[Guest]: is because the Ministry of INB has set up a committee
[Guest]: to frame rules for regulating the internet.
[Guest]: And what they're looking at, they started off with regulating news,
[Guest]: which is when there was this circular around fake news
[Guest]: and therefore regulating both online and traditional media journalists.
[Guest]: And, you know, the threat was that accreditation would be removed,
[Guest]: among other things, if they were found to be dealing in fake news.
[Guest]: And that was pulled after there was a massive pushback
[Guest]: from the traditional media journalists as well as online.
[Guest]: And then we found that there is a new committee
[Guest]: that's been formed specifically for regulating online.
[Guest]: The difference between that first fake news circular
[Guest]: and this online committee is that the online committee
[Guest]: was looking at both news and entertainment.
[Guest]: And so it's very different.
[Guest]: And if you think about it on the internet, we don't know what is news.
[Guest]: We don't know what is entertainment.
[Guest]: That definitional issue exists.
[Guest]: Entertainment can deliver news.
[Guest]: And let's face it, most of the news in India is entertainment
[Guest]: or couched in entertainment and news channels run,
[Guest]: I don't know, the shows on what Cobra is giving birth to human babies.
[Guest]: I don't know what kind of stuff they put on some of the TV channels.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I would take Tanmay Bhatt over Arnab any day
[Amit Varma]: for both news and entertainment.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, without a doubt.
[Guest]: I don't, I mean...
[Guest]: No, but you know, does Arnab do news? I'm not so sure.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, good point.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe I'm confused about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yesterday on the panel, one of my fellow panelists
[Amit Varma]: during the audience discussion, Geeta Seshu,
[Amit Varma]: raised an interesting point about news and entertainment
[Amit Varma]: and how they are defined differently
[Amit Varma]: and how, you know, news provides a public service
[Guest]: and whether entertainment...
[Guest]: Yeah, and my point was that entertainment provides
[Amit Varma]: a very, very important public service.
[Amit Varma]: Agreed, but my point was different.
[Amit Varma]: My point was that if we start thinking about the utilitarian lines
[Amit Varma]: that, hey, news provides a public service,
[Amit Varma]: entertainment is time pass,
[Amit Varma]: therefore one is more noble than the other,
[Amit Varma]: and we are falling into their trap
[Amit Varma]: and we are letting them define how the discussion proceeds.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, the way I look at it is,
[Amit Varma]: instead of looking at the utilitarian line,
[Guest]: look at first principles.
[Amit Varma]: Say that all free expression should be protected,
[Amit Varma]: whether it's news or entertainment or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: however you categorize it, it doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: That all free expression should be protected,
[Guest]: none should be regulated.
[Guest]: So I have a question for you.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Are you a free speech absolutist?
[Guest]: I am a free speech absolutist.
[Guest]: Then what are your views on incitement to violence?
[Amit Varma]: To stop, to punish or stop incitement to violence
[Amit Varma]: is not an infringement of free speech,
[Amit Varma]: if it's direct violence.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, I think Oliver Wendell Holmes
[Amit Varma]: defined it as clear and present danger.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're addressing a crowd and you tell them
[Amit Varma]: go and burn down that mosque,
[Amit Varma]: then that is incitement to violence
[Guest]: and it should absolutely be stopped.
[Guest]: Then we're in agreement.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but if somebody is telling a crowd that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, you know, Muslims don't belong here.
[Amit Varma]: Now I find that view utterly repulsive,
[Amit Varma]: but I would support the person saying that
[Amit Varma]: because I don't think those judgment calls
[Amit Varma]: on what people say or should not say
[Amit Varma]: should be made based on the personal preferences
[Amit Varma]: of people like myself or anyone else.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And if there is incitement to violence
[Amit Varma]: and there's clear and present danger
[Amit Varma]: in the words of the US Supreme Court,
[Amit Varma]: then, you know, I think that's...
[Guest]: So I used to come at this a little differently
[Guest]: because I was an absolutist when it came to free speech
[Guest]: and the point of view that you've taken
[Guest]: about incitement to violence also indicates
[Guest]: that you're not an absolutist.
[Guest]: That's a reasonable restriction to have on free speech.
[Amit Varma]: No, I disagree because I think that
[Amit Varma]: incitement to violence would be wrong
[Amit Varma]: because you're being an accessory to a crime
[Amit Varma]: and it would be wrong on those grounds.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to clamp down on free speech
[Amit Varma]: or have separate laws for free speech.
[Amit Varma]: That's what I mean.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think you need to have any law for free speech
[Amit Varma]: and that if someone incites violence
[Amit Varma]: that is already taken care of
[Amit Varma]: under whatever laws stop you from, for example,
[Amit Varma]: whatever the incitement is.
[Amit Varma]: Like if someone is telling you go and riot,
[Amit Varma]: there are laws against riots and violence.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: So therefore, my position at one point in time was
[Guest]: why should my right to free speech be curtailed
[Guest]: by the state's inability to maintain law and order?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Because it is their job to maintain law and order.
[Guest]: And so therefore, if we have a society
[Guest]: where people are afraid to commit violence
[Guest]: because they are afraid of the strong arm of the law
[Guest]: holding them to account,
[Guest]: then no matter what speech leads to that violence,
[Guest]: people would still be afraid to be violent
[Unknown]: from that perspective.
[Guest]: Now, I know that's a utopian way of looking at it
[Guest]: and things don't quite work like that.
[Guest]: And so therefore, I do believe,
[Guest]: so I'm no longer an absolutist from that perspective
[Guest]: but I do believe that committing a crime
[Guest]: or inciting a crime from that perspective is problematic.
[Amit Varma]: So we are actually on the same page,
[Amit Varma]: except that you are saying you're not an absolutist
[Amit Varma]: and I'm insisting that this is absolutism
[Amit Varma]: because I'm saying no law against free speech.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Incitements are taken care of under other laws
[Guest]: which deal with those specific things.
[Guest]: So in fact, this is the same position
[Guest]: which the Supreme Court took in the 66-A judgment
[Guest]: where they said that advocacy is an important part of free speech.
[Guest]: And I think they also, I'm not quite sure,
[Guest]: but I think they also took into account the fact
[Guest]: that the right to offend is an important part of free speech.
[Guest]: The UN Special Rapporteur on Free Speech,
[Guest]: the last one, who is Frank LaRue,
[Guest]: also included that in his report on free speech
[Guest]: and also human rights and the internet.
[Guest]: So the Supreme Court of India said that
[Guest]: incitement to violence is problematic and should be stopped.
[Guest]: But 66-A had these terms like disparaging speech
[Guest]: and annoying speech.
[Guest]: Which are vague and can be interpreted.
[Guest]: Which are vague and are meant to be misused
[Guest]: and those were struck down.
[Guest]: So you know, while I think the internet has its problems
[Guest]: when it comes to a bunch of issues,
[Guest]: when it comes to hate speech,
[Guest]: when it comes to death threats, rape threats,
[Guest]: when you have instances of, again, incitement to violence,
[Guest]: there are issues of fake news and misinformation,
[Guest]: there are issues of filter bubbles and polarization,
[Guest]: there is a potential for foreign state actors to get involved
[Guest]: and change the course of a democracy
[Guest]: through, you know, very selective targeting of messaging.
[Guest]: These are all...
[Amit Varma]: What Russia did in the US elections, basically?
[Guest]: I don't think it was just the US elections
[Guest]: because like someone mentioned yesterday as well,
[Guest]: it may have also been a part of the Scottish referendum,
[Guest]: it would have, I think, even with Brexit,
[Guest]: it's because the US is treating this as a direct threat on its democracy
[Guest]: that the rest of the world is now taking it a lot more seriously.
[Guest]: But who is to say that these same tools have not been used
[Guest]: in other contexts in the past
[Guest]: that may not have received this kind of visibility.
[Guest]: What it has done is that it has made states aware
[Guest]: of the implications of all of these things happening
[Guest]: and therefore they want to develop systems of control over speech,
[Guest]: some way of regulating,
[Guest]: because the other thing that came through in the 66-year judgment was,
[Guest]: and I disagree with this idea,
[Guest]: it came from the Supreme Court of India,
[Guest]: that they believe that the internet is a new medium and a new technology
[Guest]: and therefore there need to be a new set of laws to govern the internet.
[Guest]: Whereas my take on this is that if laws are built on principles,
[Guest]: then the same principles should apply irrespective of medium.
[Guest]: Where the internet is different from other media
[Guest]: is the disproportionate amount of scale that it has
[Guest]: and the kind of interactivity and participation
[Guest]: that lends itself to lack of control
[Guest]: and lends itself to more freedom
[Guest]: and therefore the state often feels powerless
[Guest]: when it comes to dealing with mass movements
[Guest]: and mass organizing that happens via the internet.
[Guest]: And let's face it, I have been involved in instances
[Guest]: where we have used the internet to organize
[Guest]: and build campaigns for freedoms,
[Guest]: but the same tools and the same methodology
[Guest]: has also been used for example by ISIS
[Guest]: to bring people over to fight in the Middle East.
[Guest]: So you know, we are dealing with very complex problems
[Amit Varma]: and complex fears as well,
[Guest]: and very real fears because people could die
[Guest]: or governments could fall through all of this.
[Guest]: And so at one level there is, you know,
[Guest]: when a state feels powerless,
[Guest]: the response is to do whatever possible
[Guest]: to ensure that it gets that power back
[Guest]: because it also has a responsibility
[Guest]: to ensure the unity and integrity of that nation.
[Guest]: That's a mandate that we the people have given the state
[Guest]: from that perspective.
[Guest]: I mean, I've had this crazy conversation with someone,
[Guest]: with actually the head of E-Residency for Estonia,
[Guest]: where we discussed this idea of,
[Guest]: and it's his idea of transient citizenry.
[Guest]: You should be able to very freely and very easily
[Guest]: move in and out of being a citizen of a country
[Guest]: and you should move to the state that serves you the best
[Guest]: and that leads to states being competitive.
[Guest]: You know, we talk about competitive federalism
[Guest]: within countries,
[Guest]: but there is also this competitiveness
[Guest]: between countries at a global level to retain talent.
[Guest]: I mean, the U.S. has won
[Guest]: because it has had greater freedoms in the past.
[Guest]: In the same way, so sorry, I don't know how you got to this.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that sounds utopian and quite beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: And just speaking of people voting with their feet
[Amit Varma]: and going to states which they feel serve them better.
[Amit Varma]: It's notable that the Modi government is now planning
[Amit Varma]: to put an exit tax on billionaires
[Amit Varma]: who want to leave the country
[Amit Varma]: because apparently since 2014,
[Amit Varma]: an extremely high percentage of really rich people
[Guest]: have left the country.
[Amit Varma]: I wonder why they would want to do that.
[Amit Varma]: But which kind of indicates that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that those who have the money
[Amit Varma]: and can afford to leave are by and large leaving.
[Amit Varma]: You know, including, for example,
[Amit Varma]: one of the Hiranandanis who built Powai, you know.
[Amit Varma]: He made a good Powai and left.
[Amit Varma]: I think he went to Cyprus.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, this is a digression, like you said.
[Guest]: But I'm just saying that if you think about,
[Guest]: so how does this work?
[Guest]: Is your approach as a state to retaining your best people,
[Guest]: is it to try and prevent them from leaving
[Guest]: or controlling the messaging that they're getting?
[Guest]: Or is it to create an environment
[Guest]: in which they would like to stay?
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely the latter.
[Amit Varma]: There should be no coercion.
[Amit Varma]: There are many things which Mr. Modi could have done
[Amit Varma]: to bring Ache Din,
[Amit Varma]: and these people would not have left had those happened.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't want to make this about Modi or Smriti Irani
[Guest]: or this present government.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, we had our problems with Kapil Sibal
[Amit Varma]: wanting free censorship, right?
[Amit Varma]: I think one of the fundamental things
[Amit Varma]: that people are missing during the current debates
[Amit Varma]: is that it is not just this government you're fighting.
[Amit Varma]: It's overreach and power in general,
[Amit Varma]: that governments always tend to overreach.
[Amit Varma]: And on that note, I want to take you back to the IT Act in 636A
[Amit Varma]: and the fights that happened there.
[Amit Varma]: Because as we discussed when the internet first came,
[Amit Varma]: like the IT sector itself, one reason the IT sector did well,
[Amit Varma]: the field was so new that there wasn't regulation
[Amit Varma]: in that much stifling regulation in place
[Amit Varma]: as there is in other sectors.
[Amit Varma]: But the government soon went about amending that, changing that.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the ways they attempted to do that,
[Amit Varma]: and by the way, the rationale that you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: for we need to regulate the internet
[Amit Varma]: because it's a new technology, large reach, etc.,
[Amit Varma]: has essentially been used through the ages for every new technology.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, our censor board exists
[Amit Varma]: because in the early 60s, I think it was when that court case happened,
[Amit Varma]: the government basically argued that,
[Amit Varma]: look, cinema has a much wider reach than books
[Amit Varma]: and therefore we need to censor it
[Amit Varma]: and treat it in ways different from books.
[Amit Varma]: And the same argument was made when the Gutenberg press was invented
[Amit Varma]: about books, where they said that earlier, you know,
[Amit Varma]: books would just go by hand and people would copy it,
[Amit Varma]: but now it's been printed and reaching wide dissemination
[Amit Varma]: and we need to control that.
[Amit Varma]: And so, like you correctly said,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this fear on the part of governments is natural
[Amit Varma]: because, hey, they want to protect their power
[Guest]: and all of these new technologies empower...
[Guest]: Let's also cut them a little bit of slack
[Guest]: in terms of saying that they also want to protect citizens
[Guest]: and there are people who are getting hurt,
[Guest]: who are getting abused,
[Guest]: and there is a real fear that, you know,
[Guest]: if there is any kind of incitement to violence using online media,
[Guest]: there is a problem that the governments have to face.
[Guest]: I mean, if you talk to police officers and district collectors,
[Guest]: you will realise that their job is to maintain law and order in that area.
[Guest]: They need to save lives.
[Guest]: And their logic is that by shutting down the internet in this area,
[Guest]: if I'm able to save one life, how do you put a value on that?
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes the only tool you have is a blunt tool.
[Amit Varma]: So I understand that.
[Guest]: No, also because, let's say, in terms of messaging
[Guest]: and content on the internet,
[Guest]: it's very difficult to monitor where it came from,
[Guest]: who published it, who posted it, who do they hold to account.
[Guest]: In that case, you know,
[Guest]: they can't treat everything like a natural disaster.
[Guest]: Although quite often when mobs go on rampage,
[Guest]: they treat it like a natural disaster.
[Guest]: No one is accountable. It was an act of nature.
[Guest]: In the same way, you know, like when a message starts spreading,
[Guest]: if it's a fake message of, let's say,
[Guest]: between one religion, someone getting raped
[Guest]: because of a religious identity as a revenge of some sort, right,
[Guest]: it's going to incite communal passions within those communities.
[Guest]: And under those circumstances,
[Guest]: the district magistrates, they don't know what to do.
[Guest]: They have to prevent the spread of those messages.
[Guest]: This is one of the reasons why we've had
[Guest]: the highest number of internet shutdowns in the world, in India.
[Guest]: Like 70 last year, I think there have been over 40 already this year,
[Guest]: including, I think someone mentioned yesterday that
[Guest]: just day before yesterday there were three shutdowns.
[Guest]: Some of them are for nonsensical reasons.
[Guest]: There was one instance where to prevent people cheating in exams,
[Guest]: they shut down the internet somewhere in Gujarat.
[Guest]: And, you know, there are laws in place, there are rules in place.
[Guest]: The government doesn't necessarily apply them in a manner
[Guest]: which is in line with their own guidelines.
[Guest]: And a lot of these things get done post-facto.
[Guest]: The first decision is to shut it down.
[Amit Varma]: I think state capacity being limited, the first impulse
[Amit Varma]: whenever violence is breaking out is to shut down the internet.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a very good point you make
[Amit Varma]: and you're playing devil's advocate with great success again.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll turn this back on you and say that
[Amit Varma]: why is government regulation not the answer then?
[Guest]: Well, the point is that the internet is already regulated.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: There is a law for takedown, which is through a court process
[Guest]: called Section 79, where if you want some content,
[Guest]: let's say, which has been used to defame you
[Guest]: or which has put up false information about you,
[Guest]: you can go to court and get that content taken down.
[Guest]: There is Section 69, which is secret government blocking,
[Guest]: where the government can ask an ISP to block a particular site
[Guest]: and that's going to go through a process within the government
[Guest]: which is why the Supreme Court retained it.
[Guest]: And there are existing laws regarding defamation
[Guest]: and it's applicable online and offline, incitement to violence.
[Guest]: So there are already laws existing.
[Guest]: I personally, and we go back to that earlier point,
[Guest]: I don't think there's a need for a different law for the internet.
[Amit Varma]: So let me ask you this.
[Amit Varma]: We are both on the same page that we don't need all those laws.
[Amit Varma]: But here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: All those IPC laws exist, 295A, 153A and so on, the Sedition Law.
[Amit Varma]: The IT Act exists right now, 69A exists,
[Amit Varma]: the government can block any website.
[Amit Varma]: So what is it trying to do further?
[Amit Varma]: What's the deal?
[Guest]: Everything is already pretty much covered.
[Guest]: With this committee, I have no idea why this is happening.
[Guest]: I don't think anyone understands why this is being put into place.
[Amit Varma]: What is this a reaction to?
[Amit Varma]: Is this a case of something is wrong?
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they heard our episode and here's a problem.
[Amit Varma]: We must do something.
[Amit Varma]: This is something, so let's do it.
[Guest]: Is it that classic sort of...
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: And I've spoken with a bunch of people.
[Guest]: Nobody understands why the government is looking to do this.
[Guest]: It almost seems whimsical.
[Amit Varma]: Because they already have draconian power.
[Guest]: Yeah, so you know, they do.
[Guest]: I was joking yesterday that Varun Grover in his comedy routines
[Guest]: uses this line called Kabootar ki Barfi.
[Guest]: The king steps out and says,
[Guest]: Aaj hum kabootar ki barfi khayenge.
[Guest]: And then no one knows what it is,
[Guest]: but everyone says, yes, great idea, great idea, great idea.
[Guest]: So we don't know whether this is as whimsical as that.
[Guest]: They're trying to control news and entertainment
[Guest]: in a space where you can't distinguish between news and entertainment,
[Guest]: where you don't have jurisdictional control.
[Guest]: Because I can start publishing out of somewhere in Norway.
[Amit Varma]: How will they even be able to stop?
[Guest]: Like I said, I don't know why we should make that distinction.
[Guest]: And on the internet, these are all moving targets.
[Guest]: You block one site, another one will crop up.
[Guest]: We did that with the blogs, if you remember.
[Guest]: When the blogs were blocked,
[Guest]: all we did was at the end of the thing, we added colon 8080.
[Amit Varma]: And everyone was able to access the blogs.
[Amit Varma]: But this was only the people who were savvy enough to know those.
[Guest]: No, but these things spread.
[Guest]: Look, whatever happens on the internet,
[Guest]: it's like a hydra, multi-headed hydra.
[Amit Varma]: You cut one head off, another one pops up.
[Amit Varma]: This is not going to end. It's always a moving target.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, regulation is impossible,
[Amit Varma]: but that is not the argument we want to make.
[Amit Varma]: We want to make the argument in principle.
[Amit Varma]: And that goes back to sort of the IT Act and 66A,
[Amit Varma]: because that to me is illustrative,
[Amit Varma]: not just in terms of how the government realizes that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, this is something we don't regulate adequately.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go in and try to do this.
[Amit Varma]: But it's also illustrative of something
[Amit Varma]: that you've been part of in the past and other contexts,
[Amit Varma]: which is a civil society fight back against it,
[Amit Varma]: both in terms of sort of media outrage and also in a legal sense.
[Guest]: So can you tell me a little bit more about that?
[Guest]: So what happened with 66A was that there were terms
[Guest]: that came in from the government in the 66A law,
[Guest]: which were about speech that is annoying and disparaging,
[Guest]: and very vague terms which can be misinterpreted.
[Amit Varma]: I've got to say Article 19.2 of the Constitution,
[Amit Varma]: which lays out reasonable restrictions,
[Amit Varma]: is equally vague in terms of public order and decency
[Guest]: and morality and all of those.
[Guest]: Well, this was even more vague.
[Guest]: I know, yeah.
[Guest]: And so because it didn't hold up to even Article 19.2,
[Guest]: it was struck down by the Supreme Court
[Guest]: because it was also being used arbitrarily.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me a little bit about that process
[Amit Varma]: of getting it struck down in the political economy.
[Guest]: So I think what happened was we got a bit lucky in the sense
[Guest]: and someone got hurt in the process,
[Guest]: so it's not right to use the phrase lucky here,
[Guest]: but essentially two innocent girls,
[Guest]: one of whom put up an update on Facebook
[Guest]: when Bal Thackeray passed away,
[Guest]: saying that why should there be a holiday
[Guest]: every time a politician dies, right?
[Guest]: Now, that was disrespectful,
[Guest]: but it was clearly not violative of Article 19.2.
[Guest]: And so therefore, I think a bunch of Shiv Sena people
[Guest]: landed up at the police station
[Guest]: and forced them to arrest these two girls.
[Guest]: One girl had put up that update, the other had liked it.
[Guest]: And so that was the sheer single case
[Guest]: of this young lawyer from Delhi,
[Guest]: you know, who had some legal backing as well
[Guest]: in terms of great support.
[Guest]: She went and filed a case
[Guest]: for getting this declared unconstitutional.
[Guest]: There were other cases also that had been filed
[Guest]: and they got clubbed with this case.
[Guest]: So there were other ITI cases on Section 79, Section 69 as well.
[Guest]: And up until then, we had been raising these issues,
[Guest]: but a lot of the instances of people getting arrested
[Guest]: under 66A were not like as...
[Guest]: Some of it was related to political speech.
[Guest]: There was a cartoonist, Asim Trivedi.
[Guest]: He was arrested because of some cartoons against a politician.
[Guest]: So, you know, under those, that wasn't a clear...
[Guest]: I think the people who may not have been as convinced by that,
[Guest]: saying, oh, this is political speech and he's being...
[Guest]: There were instances where someone was being disparaging
[Guest]: to the national flag in cartoons and stuff like that.
[Guest]: There were issues there.
[Amit Varma]: I remember writing a column a decade ago
[Amit Varma]: about somebody arrested for insulting the flag and the anthem,
[Amit Varma]: separate incidents, under 295A.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, those laws always existed and still do.
[Guest]: They do, but I'm just saying that this was as clear-cut a case.
[Unknown]: This was just wrong, right?
[Guest]: And so because of all of these petitions filed
[Guest]: and more people became aware of the way this law had been misused,
[Guest]: I think a lot of us got together and we started raising the issue
[Guest]: that we had been raising for a while.
[Guest]: So the way change happens is that it, you know...
[Guest]: I mean, Marshall Ganz talks about this in terms of organising,
[Guest]: is that there is a story of you,
[Guest]: as in why does something matter to you?
[Guest]: Then there's a story of us,
[Guest]: saying why should this matter to all of us?
[Guest]: And then there's the story of now,
[Guest]: as in why is this important now?
[Guest]: So quite often that I've seen with...
[Guest]: For my sake and the sake of the listeners, which book is this?
[Guest]: I don't remember the name of the book,
[Guest]: but Marshall Ganz is a professor at the Howard Kennedy School
[Guest]: and he teaches organising.
[Guest]: If you go to YouTube, you'll find a series of lectures
[Guest]: from the Resistance School,
[Guest]: which was brought out to teach liberal resistance on issues.
[Guest]: So I watched a bunch of those episodes.
[Guest]: And so Marshall Ganz...
[Guest]: So the story of now is very important
[Guest]: and I think most of us missed that.
[Guest]: So even with the Net Utility Campaign,
[Guest]: which I was a part of the team that ran it,
[Guest]: I'd been raising this issue of net utility for years, right?
[Guest]: It took a really horrible TRH paper
[Guest]: that made it a clear and present danger
[Guest]: for people to galvanise and start acting on it,
[Guest]: along with everything else that came together.
[Guest]: In the same way with 66A,
[Guest]: a lot of people had been raising these issues,
[Guest]: but this was the one case that did it, right?
[Guest]: So there's always a story of now that needs to kick in
[Guest]: for these cases to... for change to start.
[Amit Varma]: And is that story of now something that happens serendipitously
[Amit Varma]: or can something be framed to become the story of now?
[Guest]: It can. So one is the creation of deadlines.
[Guest]: So saying that, you know, you need to act on this by this date
[Guest]: and that's when these changes will kick in.
[Guest]: So it depends.
[Guest]: You have to keep...
[Guest]: You can create some sort of urgency, but it's not easy
[Guest]: because there'll always be questions asked.
[Guest]: Why now? Why is this important?
[Guest]: Like, story of us and story of you address
[Guest]: why is this important to you and to all of us.
[Guest]: But the now is often out of our hands.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, for example, in Aadhaar with the Supreme Court case,
[Guest]: there is a clear story of now
[Guest]: that kicked in sometime around December,
[Guest]: which was created by the government
[Guest]: enforcing linking deadlines for December 31st.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So when we ran the Speak For Me campaign at that point in time,
[Guest]: that was a story of now kicking in saying here's the deadline.
[Guest]: Mail your MP, mail your mobile operator,
[Guest]: mail your bank saying you do not want this.
[Guest]: If it hadn't been for the deadline and they'd made it indefinite,
[Guest]: we wouldn't have had a story of now with that.
[Guest]: In the same way, the Supreme Court case going on...
[Guest]: So this is to galvanize people together,
[Guest]: you need all of these three elements.
[Amit Varma]: Which is very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: So an evil government buffoon who wants to do something
[Amit Varma]: which they know is wrong and will attract resistance
[Amit Varma]: can then avoid putting in elements
[Guest]: which can turn into a story of now.
[Guest]: Well, historically, tyranny has always creeped up on societies
[Guest]: rather than...
[Guest]: In some instances, obviously, there have been military coups, etc.
[Guest]: But typically, long-term sustained tyranny has crept up
[Guest]: and you haven't realized that it's hit you
[Guest]: because then they avoid giving people that moment.
[Guest]: And quite often, when it comes to attacks on freedoms
[Guest]: and attacks on free speech in particular,
[Guest]: we tend to keep moving on to the next one and the next one
[Guest]: and forgetting the ones that got left behind.
[Guest]: So sometimes it takes this one case and one instance
[Guest]: which galvanizes a lot more people together to push back.
[Guest]: So here's the thing.
[Guest]: I think this attempt to regulate online content,
[Guest]: I feel that it is just as worrying, if not more,
[Guest]: than the net-utility issue.
[Guest]: Because net-utility was about the ISPs controlling
[Guest]: what you can and cannot access
[Guest]: and charging you differently for what you want to access.
[Guest]: This is looking at creating a framework for controlling your speech.
[Guest]: This should matter more to people.
[Guest]: So why there isn't as much of an outrage now
[Guest]: is something I don't quite understand.
[Guest]: We saw, for example, there was this huge outrage about encryption
[Guest]: a few years ago where they were saying that
[Guest]: all your WhatsApp messages you have to store copies in plain text form.
[Guest]: It's a stupid policy that came out of the government.
[Guest]: Immediate outrage, immediate withdrawal.
[Guest]: If you remember porn ban,
[Guest]: huge outrage in a country as overtly moralistic as ours.
[Amit Varma]: Huge outrage against the ban on porn.
[Amit Varma]: Enormous consumers of porn had encouraged all of you
[Amit Varma]: to read this book called Everybody Lies by Seth Stevens Davidovitz
[Amit Varma]: which just reveals not just the amount of porn Indians consume
[Amit Varma]: but the kind of porn which kind of blew me away.
[Guest]: But sorry, carry on.
[Guest]: So we had the Attorney General of India going to the Supreme Court
[Guest]: and saying we don't want to be in anyone's bedroom
[Guest]: and this is not that kind of a government etc.
[Guest]: He said all of these things
[Guest]: that we don't want to control what people watch then.
[Guest]: And now when there's this talk about regulating online content
[Guest]: there is no reaction.
[Amit Varma]: You know you spoke about creeping tyranny
[Amit Varma]: which is a really important point
[Amit Varma]: and I don't want to make a political point right now
[Amit Varma]: but it's important to point out that
[Amit Varma]: yes what I say and many people say
[Amit Varma]: about Narendra Modi being the true heir of Indira Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: there's something to that.
[Amit Varma]: But I think people make a mistake
[Amit Varma]: when they talk about him imposing another emergency.
[Amit Varma]: He doesn't need to.
[Amit Varma]: He doesn't need to actually declare an emergency.
[Amit Varma]: He can give himself the same kind of control
[Amit Varma]: in a creeping sort of way.
[Guest]: Well I think there's been a creeping increase in control
[Guest]: and an attempt to increase control ever since 2008.
[Guest]: Like the attacks on Bombay were used to bring in
[Guest]: significantly regressive controls to changes in the IT Act
[Guest]: which brought us Section 69
[Guest]: which brought us Section 79
[Guest]: which was later watered down by the Supreme Court
[Guest]: which brought us 66A
[Guest]: and you know even off
[Guest]: and let's not forget that these are governments
[Guest]: which argue for it.
[Guest]: It's not necessarily political parties.
[Guest]: So you know you had the BJP criticising 66A if you remember.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a point I make.
[Amit Varma]: The government in power is always going to...
[Guest]: But the 66A was settled during the BJP regime
[Guest]: and in court the government under the BJP
[Guest]: was still arguing for 66A.
[Guest]: Let's not forget this same government
[Guest]: that argued against a fundamental right to privacy
[Guest]: in the same way that Kapil Sibal also argued for pre-censorship
[Guest]: and for protecting 66A.
[Guest]: My point is it doesn't matter who's in power.
[Guest]: Governments will come and governments will go.
[Guest]: It's the power that we allow governments to accumulate over us over time
[Amit Varma]: that is incremental.
[Amit Varma]: The problem is the state.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a government or any particular party.
[Amit Varma]: It is in the nature of the state to consolidate and increase power
[Amit Varma]: and it is imperative on citizens
[Amit Varma]: to you know keep fighting back constantly
[Amit Varma]: regardless of which party is in power.
[Guest]: Oh and this is funny.
[Guest]: One of the things that's happened with this particular committee
[Guest]: is that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
[Guest]: which has created this committee
[Guest]: does not have jurisdiction over the internet regulation.
[Guest]: So what's happened is that over the last two years
[Guest]: Rajavardhan Singh Rathore who is the Minister of State for Information and Broadcasting
[Guest]: in a written response in Parliament
[Guest]: has said that it has no plans to regulate the internet and online content
[Guest]: or video on demand services
[Guest]: because that is the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So you have a situation where after twice having said
[Guest]: hey this is not our remit we shouldn't be doing this
[Guest]: they've gone out and created a committee for doing exactly that.
[Guest]: So I'm not quite sure about how the government functions.
[Guest]: How can they create a committee over an issue that they don't have jurisdiction?
[Amit Varma]: I mean this is very funny.
[Amit Varma]: Governments often you know parties contradict themselves
[Amit Varma]: given when you see what they say
[Amit Varma]: when they're not in power and when they are in power
[Guest]: but here this is actually a minister.
[Guest]: They're contradicting themselves while they're in power.
[Guest]: But the other problem and I want to get into this bit
[Guest]: is this entire idea of self-regulation
[Guest]: because we are already regulating how we speak and what we say
[Guest]: because there is this fear of clamping down from the government.
[Guest]: You saw that yesterday we had Tanmay Bhatt talking about
[Guest]: how comedians are discussing about how they will treat certain jokes
[Guest]: so they might tell a joke to a select audience
[Guest]: knowing that it will not be broadcast
[Guest]: and they might not put that online
[Guest]: or they might only do it in a wider audience in a show.
[Guest]: So you're already controlling where your message goes.
[Amit Varma]: In fact my producer on the show Abbas
[Amit Varma]: who is in the studio right now is a stand-up comic
[Amit Varma]: and you should see the kind of jokes he tells me in private.
[Amit Varma]: He'd never dare to repeat them outside.
[Amit Varma]: And so therefore...
[Guest]: I'm glad I made him laugh.
[Guest]: So for me that's worrying.
[Guest]: So there are...
[Guest]: Like when Amazon Prime first came to India
[Guest]: they had two versions of American Gods.
[Guest]: One was the part that they promoted here which was censored
[Guest]: and then there was another one where if you search for American Gods
[Guest]: you also saw something called International Edition
[Guest]: which was not censored.
[Guest]: Angry Indian Goddesses was censored by Netflix.
[Guest]: And so you've had these situations
[Guest]: where many of these platforms are self-censoring
[Guest]: because they're afraid of government pushback against them
[Amit Varma]: when they don't need to self-censor.
[Amit Varma]: That's a chilling effect.
[Amit Varma]: It's like someone said in 75 during the emergency as well
[Amit Varma]: that the press is crawling when they're asked to bend.
[Amit Varma]: Which is, you know, that kind of overreach.
[Guest]: No, I think over here no one's even asked them to bend yet.
[Guest]: And we know that the professional content providers
[Guest]: are already discussing a self-regulation code
[Guest]: which means that it's likely that they will have their own version
[Guest]: of a censor board within each organization
[Guest]: that's going to censor content
[Guest]: according to what the industry agrees
[Guest]: the norms for our country will be.
[Guest]: And I would go back and say that, you know,
[Guest]: my right to get that content in an unadulterated, uncensored form
[Guest]: is just as important to me.
[Guest]: That's a right that I have in that sense, right?
[Amit Varma]: That's a positive right you're defining, not a negative right.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in the sense that I would say that
[Amit Varma]: if certain media houses choose to self-regulate in that way,
[Amit Varma]: I think that is fine. It's up to them.
[Amit Varma]: As long as no other media house or individual
[Amit Varma]: is coercively forced to conform to those rules.
[Guest]: So, for example, if...
[Guest]: But what if they collectively do that and therefore...
[Amit Varma]: But how? See, like, I'm editor of a magazine Pragati, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now five other online magazines can come together
[Amit Varma]: and collectively decide to have certain standards for themselves
[Amit Varma]: and bleep out certain things.
[Amit Varma]: I don't care as long as they don't force me to do it.
[Guest]: No, again, and this is where I think we had this discussion yesterday as well
[Guest]: where I kind of disagree.
[Guest]: What's happening is that there is very little room being left
[Guest]: for upstarts to come in
[Guest]: and for there to be a truly competitive market
[Guest]: when it comes to the aggregation of content
[Guest]: because of market power which allows exclusivity
[Guest]: for that particular piece of content.
[Guest]: And, you know, this is what's happening to the internet.
[Guest]: So if you look at antitrust regulations...
[Amit Varma]: No, but in this instance, here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: In this instance, any online magazine, say,
[Amit Varma]: that joins a self-regulation group like this,
[Amit Varma]: in any case has the intent to regulate itself
[Amit Varma]: and conform by the government guidelines.
[Amit Varma]: So it doesn't make a difference.
[Amit Varma]: My issue always comes where the coercion begins.
[Guest]: No, no, but I'm saying that...
[Guest]: Whether it comes from the government or any other group.
[Guest]: I'm saying that even when you look at private parties,
[Guest]: if you look at the access to content and the entities that control it,
[Guest]: it's a fairly limited set.
[Guest]: So there is cartelization in this censorship.
[Unknown]: Sure, and...
[Guest]: And therefore, there isn't enough room left in the market
[Guest]: for alternatives and the only other route is piracy.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: What I'm saying is that cartelization,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, a cartelization of what approach you have
[Amit Varma]: towards news and regulation is there anyway,
[Amit Varma]: regardless of whether you formalize it
[Guest]: with a self-regulating body or you don't.
[Guest]: No, but the decentralized nature of the internet
[Guest]: actually destroys that cartelization.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And that's something which I'd mentioned...
[Amit Varma]: But that can only be stopped with coercion.
[Amit Varma]: Coercion from whom?
[Amit Varma]: I'm saying cartelization can only happen
[Amit Varma]: if there is coercion of some form.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, the internet is decentralized.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example...
[Guest]: No, you see, what's happened is that a majority of the internet is now,
[Guest]: and we discussed this in the Future of the Internet podcast as well,
[Guest]: that it's largely being controlled by very large players
[Guest]: for whom it's important for them to be able to play with governments
[Guest]: in order to retain the power that they have.
[Guest]: And therefore, there is no room left for...
[Guest]: For example, there is...
[Amit Varma]: We're talking past each other, actually.
[Amit Varma]: It's a different issue.
[Amit Varma]: The point you're making as you made in Future of the Internet...
[Guest]: No, no, so I'm saying that these larger players
[Guest]: are more likely to self-censor in cartelization
[Guest]: in order to be in the good favors of the government.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but I'll tell you why we're talking past each other.
[Amit Varma]: Because the point you're making is the one you made
[Amit Varma]: in the Future of the Internet episode, and I agree that
[Amit Varma]: these larger players like Facebook and YouTube
[Amit Varma]: are almost like monopolies because of the market power they have
[Amit Varma]: and network efforts kicking in.
[Amit Varma]: But what I was addressing was what you were saying
[Amit Varma]: about the danger of...
[Amit Varma]: And I agree with the danger.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think... You know, I think self-regulation is sort of pointless.
[Amit Varma]: The market regulates the best, and I'll expand upon that if you want,
[Amit Varma]: or civil society regulates the best.
[Amit Varma]: But, for example, the fear that you were expressing,
[Amit Varma]: if I understood it correctly,
[Amit Varma]: is that a bunch of media houses will come together
[Amit Varma]: and decide to self-regulate and have a body
[Amit Varma]: that sets certain standards for them,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore we are in trouble.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my point is that anybody who voluntarily joins such a body
[Amit Varma]: has the intent to censor themselves anyway.
[Guest]: So, therefore, it doesn't really matter.
[Guest]: It's smooth whether they formalize it or not.
[Guest]: It could be competitive in nature.
[Guest]: If you're the one that doesn't do it,
[Guest]: then there is a fear that there will be
[Guest]: a regulatory backlash against you.
[Guest]: And so, you know, I'm just saying that the way
[Guest]: because all of these guys interact,
[Guest]: because they work together,
[Guest]: I don't think competitive forces are strong enough right now
[Guest]: to allow for an outlier,
[Guest]: for someone who's going to go against the grain.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but look, here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: If the Times of India and the Hindustan Times
[Amit Varma]: and Indian Express come together and say...
[Guest]: And decide to split the market between themselves.
[Guest]: No, no, no. They say that we'll self-regulate.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just talking about regulation here.
[Amit Varma]: If they say that we will self-regulate and we'll form a body
[Amit Varma]: and these are the standards we'll apply to,
[Amit Varma]: the Hindu can say no without any consequence.
[Guest]: I'm not sure whether that's going to happen on the internet.
[Amit Varma]: Which are the players you're referring to
[Amit Varma]: who will form a self-regulation?
[Guest]: No, there's already a committee
[Guest]: at the Internet and Mobile Association of India
[Guest]: that is debating these issues.
[Guest]: There is, at this point in time, no clear, you know, agreement.
[Guest]: Because there are some players,
[Guest]: and this is like information that I have from talking to sources,
[Guest]: there are some players who want a self-regulatory code
[Guest]: who've already created one.
[Guest]: And there are others who want to work with them on that
[Guest]: and there are others who oppose that idea.
[Guest]: So, yes, there is currently no consensus.
[Guest]: But with this government pressure coming in,
[Guest]: in order to ensure that there isn't
[Guest]: overreaching government regulation,
[Guest]: they are all seeing self-regulation as a way out.
[Guest]: What do you feel about this?
[Guest]: So, I think they're being forced into self-regulation.
[Amit Varma]: Right. But if you were in...
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, yesterday one of our fellow panelists
[Amit Varma]: said that because government regulation
[Amit Varma]: is going to happen anyway,
[Guest]: we should self-regulate as a pre-emptive measure.
[Amit Varma]: That's exactly the point, right?
[Amit Varma]: Which is a practical point they're making,
[Guest]: but I don't agree with it. Do you?
[Guest]: So, I think there needs to be a pushback
[Guest]: against self-regulation because of a number of issues.
[Guest]: Number one is that it creates a distinction
[Guest]: between the Internet that we get access to in India
[Guest]: versus what we get access to across the globe.
[Guest]: So, our exposure to perhaps content
[Guest]: from across the globe might be impacted
[Guest]: by people who do not conform to these guidelines.
[Guest]: And secondly, what would happen is that
[Guest]: there would be content that we want to consume here
[Guest]: that is legal for us to consume over here.
[Guest]: But because of overarching guidelines,
[Guest]: I mean, you've had instances of innocuous words
[Guest]: like breasts being censored on TV and in films.
[Guest]: Chicken breasts.
[Guest]: Chicken breasts, right?
[Guest]: So, I mean, would you want Netflix and Amazon, etc.
[Guest]: to start doing that?
[Guest]: Think of people who want to watch
[Guest]: Game of Thrones on Hotstar.
[Guest]: You remove the nudity from that,
[Guest]: so either you blur it out or you cut those scenes.
[Guest]: And when you cut those scenes,
[Guest]: then you lose the context of what's going on.
[Guest]: So, I mean, there's an old question about
[Guest]: what is art and what is obscenity in that sense, right?
[Guest]: And so, I think we would be worse off
[Guest]: in terms of getting access to the kind of content
[Guest]: which is legal that we should be allowed to watch
[Guest]: because of a nanny state.
[Guest]: Secondly, what would they do about those players
[Guest]: who choose not to become a part of this self-censorship regime?
[Guest]: Would they be blocked in India, right?
[Guest]: So, the internet was meant to create
[Guest]: that competitive marketplace where
[Guest]: if there are consumers who want access to that content,
[Guest]: everyone will have to evolve to providing them
[Guest]: that kind of content.
[Guest]: Here, it's going to happen in the reverse,
[Guest]: that it's going to get blocked if it's not a part of that.
[Guest]: The third point is that it actually then
[Guest]: takes us down the road of enabling government regulation.
[Guest]: So, you have self-regulatory mechanisms
[Guest]: in, for example, the News Broadcasters Association
[Guest]: where channels who do shows on snakes,
[Guest]: human babies, and shit like that,
[Guest]: don't necessarily,
[Guest]: they're not a part of the News Broadcasters Association,
[Guest]: so they're not governed by it.
[Guest]: And so then, for those who choose not to be governed by this,
[Guest]: will that then lead to the government saying,
[Guest]: oh, the self-regulatory mechanism is not valid,
[Guest]: it's not working,
[Guest]: but we understand that you want there to be regulation
[Guest]: because you already have a code,
[Guest]: now let us put our own code together.
[Guest]: And then we effectively open the doors
[Guest]: for regulation through self-regulation.
[Guest]: Instead, if what we need to do here
[Guest]: is push back on principles.
[Guest]: So, number one is that there is no distinction
[Guest]: between news and non-news content, frankly.
[Guest]: And news is not the exclusive prerogative of journalists.
[Guest]: Anyone on the internet can disseminate,
[Guest]: can report news, anyone can have an opinion.
[Guest]: That's the freedom that we have on the internet,
[Guest]: which we don't have in print or on TV.
[Guest]: In the sense, there's also,
[Guest]: there is no distinction between a journalist and a non-journalist,
[Guest]: between a journalist and an entertainer,
[Guest]: between a stand-up comedian and a news anchor.
[Guest]: These are all distinctions which have been made irrelevant,
[Guest]: which were, there were roles and positions that were created
[Guest]: through the implementation of control
[Guest]: over who gets to communicate.
[Guest]: I don't need an accredition to launch a news site.
[Guest]: A stand-up comedian doesn't need a license
[Guest]: to go and showcase his short film, right?
[Guest]: And I think that's the beauty of the internet.
[Guest]: We don't want to lose that nature,
[Guest]: that it's not, you know, there's a distinction that's being made
[Guest]: between professional content and user-generated content.
[Guest]: On the internet, all users are both creators and consumers.
[Guest]: Everything is user-generated content.
[Guest]: So, therefore, when you start slicing it up into pieces,
[Guest]: that's when it falls apart.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, so, you know, after yesterday's discussion,
[Amit Varma]: two tactical points came to mind,
[Amit Varma]: and I agree 100% with you and very strongly,
[Amit Varma]: which is, might be a bit of a repetition,
[Amit Varma]: but one tactical point is the reason
[Amit Varma]: that pre-empting government regulation with self-regulation,
[Amit Varma]: I think, is a self-goal,
[Amit Varma]: is because then you are tacitly agreeing
[Amit Varma]: that this needs regulation.
[Amit Varma]: It's much better to take a stand on principle
[Amit Varma]: that, no, this doesn't need regulation
[Amit Varma]: and there will be no regulation.
[Amit Varma]: Once you agree that some regulation is required,
[Amit Varma]: but you say, we will do it ourselves,
[Amit Varma]: then, inevitably, the government will step in and find faults
[Amit Varma]: and say, look, you are not being able to do this because of X, Y, Z,
[Amit Varma]: but you have already agreed regulation is required,
[Amit Varma]: so let us do it.
[Amit Varma]: It's much better to fight on first principles
[Amit Varma]: and say that no regulation is not required,
[Amit Varma]: we will regulate you, not the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: And the second point is that I think,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there's this famous poem by Pastor Naimoler
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, first they came for the Jews,
[Amit Varma]: then they came for blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: and by the time they came for me,
[Amit Varma]: no one was left to fight for me.
[Amit Varma]: I think whether they intend to or not,
[Amit Varma]: they might be achieving a similar effect here
[Amit Varma]: when they have all these categories of news and entertainment,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, one of the questions that you asked yesterday,
[Amit Varma]: the cunning devil's advocate questions was that
[Amit Varma]: what if they'd come and tell the big players that,
[Amit Varma]: don't worry, we won't touch you,
[Amit Varma]: we'll go after the small fake news guys first.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, this is very cunning
[Amit Varma]: because this is going to end in a Naimoler kind of way
[Amit Varma]: where first they came for the small fake news guys,
[Amit Varma]: then they came for the entertainment,
[Amit Varma]: and when they came for the news, nobody was left to fight for us.
[Amit Varma]: And instead of this, we all have to band together and say,
[Amit Varma]: forget the categories, forget the ideologies,
[Amit Varma]: forget everything you believe in,
[Amit Varma]: just fight on this one principle if you agree with it,
[Amit Varma]: that no regulation.
[Guest]: So going back to news,
[Guest]: I think one of the things that we've seen in common
[Guest]: between the two regimes with both Trump and the NDA regime here
[Guest]: is that there's been a distinct focus on discrediting news organizations.
[Guest]: And that's actually a part of the process of, you know,
[Guest]: gaining greater control,
[Guest]: because if people don't know what the truth is
[Guest]: and they think that and they like,
[Guest]: I think someone is mentioning that in case of Reddit,
[Guest]: the organization is discredited,
[Guest]: no one judges the content on the basis of the legitimacy of the content.
[Guest]: So the source is actually delegitimized.
[Guest]: And so I think we are still facing this problem as a country,
[Guest]: as a democracy where news itself has been delegitimized.
[Guest]: Many news organizations have helped do that
[Guest]: because of the kind of entertainment that they have run on their channels.
[Guest]: And so there is also this counterpoint that, you know,
[Guest]: perhaps there needs to be a better control
[Guest]: because that also has an effect on society.
[Amit Varma]: So let me play devil's advocate now.
[Guest]: I was just doing that.
[Guest]: You were just doing that.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, now I will continue playing devil's advocate
[Amit Varma]: and I will throw it back at you.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm putting you in the spot instead of the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: You refer to the 2008 broadcast code where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: during the terrorist attacks, TV channels made these obvious mistakes
[Amit Varma]: which impacted national security,
[Amit Varma]: where they were showing what was going on
[Amit Varma]: and the terrorists sitting in Pakistan were getting that information.
[Amit Varma]: And the government stepped in and said,
[Amit Varma]: look, this is clearly wrong.
[Amit Varma]: You need a broadcast code, blah, blah, everything very reasonable.
[Amit Varma]: And the point that you made yesterday, again,
[Amit Varma]: was that what has happened with Cambridge Analytica
[Amit Varma]: is an analog of that moment for the online space.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the argument would come from the state
[Amit Varma]: that therefore government regulation is required.
[Amit Varma]: And the earlier answer you gave,
[Amit Varma]: which is that there is already enough regulation in the form of 295A and all,
[Amit Varma]: is kind of a cop-out because we are against that regulation also.
[Guest]: No, look, here's the thing.
[Guest]: You will have, there's always room for more regulation.
[Guest]: But there doesn't seem to be any room for building capacity
[Guest]: to enforce existing regulations.
[Amit Varma]: But that's also moot, right?
[Guest]: My question is a philosophical one.
[Guest]: So the problem really is that
[Guest]: the way regulations typically work is that their implementation is arbitrary.
[Guest]: It will be used in specific instances,
[Guest]: but many people who violate those same rules will be let go.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing is going to happen to them.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a utilitarian argument.
[Amit Varma]: Give me the philosophical argument.
[Amit Varma]: Why should there be no regulation when things like this happen?
[Guest]: I haven't quite figured this out yet, actually.
[Guest]: I've been thinking about this for a while.
[Guest]: For me, at one level, I do believe there's a need
[Guest]: for regulation of large platforms
[Guest]: because of the disproportionate ability they have
[Guest]: to control narratives and speech and access to speech.
[Guest]: And we need neutrality in the access to speech
[Guest]: for people to get the right kind of information
[Guest]: in order to make better decisions.
[Guest]: And if someone is controlling their access to speech,
[Guest]: then they're controlling the way that they're thinking.
[Guest]: So at some level, I think we need to enforce neutrality
[Guest]: amongst these organizations.
[Guest]: And also, I do believe that we need to prevent
[Guest]: mass targeting and mass personalization
[Guest]: and behavioral targeting of citizens.
[Guest]: And business models of advertising need to change
[Guest]: because it is the blind nature of advertising
[Guest]: that is taking us down this path where
[Guest]: people are able to make money
[Guest]: by facilitating or spreading fake news
[Guest]: because there is no distinction between real and fake
[Guest]: when it comes to the advertising business.
[Amit Varma]: No one knows where their ad is being run.
[Guest]: But is your point then is that regulation is required?
[Guest]: No, so I'm saying that there are a large number of things
[Guest]: that have happened collectively for this to become possible.
[Guest]: So if you prevent the collection of mass
[Guest]: and very granular personal and behavioral data,
[Guest]: that is going to address micro-targeting to quite an extent.
[Guest]: If you ensure that people have choice
[Guest]: about deleting their own history
[Guest]: and therefore not feeding algorithms
[Guest]: or keeping the algorithms or allowing the algorithms
[Guest]: to profile them to a greater extent,
[Guest]: then again you will be able to prevent personalization
[Guest]: at that level of scale
[Guest]: where there are filter bubbles that are created.
[Guest]: So to each of these issues, there are solutions.
[Guest]: So for example, if you see,
[Guest]: Facebook actually deals with hate speech
[Guest]: a lot better than Twitter does.
[Guest]: So from a self-regulation perspective,
[Guest]: I think it is up to organizations to change the way they work
[Guest]: in order to ensure that there is no need for government regulation.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, many of these organizations,
[Guest]: including Facebook, have failed.
[Guest]: They rode their luck for too long.
[Amit Varma]: So are you arguing that there is a need for government regulation?
[Guest]: I think we've reached a point
[Guest]: where it's difficult to argue against regulation
[Guest]: as much as we don't want it.
[Guest]: And I think it's unfortunate that we've reached this point.
[Guest]: But are you for it or against it? Do you think it's necessary?
[Guest]: So principally, I'm against regulation.
[Guest]: But practically, I think we've reached the stage where it is necessary.
[Guest]: No, no. Where it's necessary or inevitable?
[Guest]: Necessary and inevitable.
[Unknown]: Okay.
[Guest]: So that's why this is a very difficult question for me to answer
[Guest]: because principally I'm opposed to that idea.
[Amit Varma]: I'll disagree and I'll try to explain why.
[Amit Varma]: I hope I can manage.
[Amit Varma]: And then I'll bring up what is difficult for me to answer.
[Amit Varma]: My disagreement comes from saying that,
[Amit Varma]: what happened in 2008 can just be handled
[Amit Varma]: because it's a national security issue
[Amit Varma]: and it can be handled by laws that pertain to that.
[Amit Varma]: You don't specifically need to regulate the media
[Amit Varma]: or free speech for an instance like that.
[Amit Varma]: Agreed.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, the point I sort of made yesterday
[Amit Varma]: was that people often assume that when you talk about regulation,
[Amit Varma]: there are only two options,
[Amit Varma]: which are government regulation or self-regulation.
[Amit Varma]: To me, the best kind of regulation, the natural regulation,
[Amit Varma]: which leads to self-regulation but is an overarching thing,
[Amit Varma]: is competition.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll clarify on that
[Amit Varma]: when you talk about seeming monopolies like Facebook.
[Amit Varma]: Competition is the best regulation
[Amit Varma]: because markets sometimes have a bad name,
[Amit Varma]: so you can call it markets or you can call it civil society
[Amit Varma]: because markets are nothing more than a web of voluntary actions
[Amit Varma]: of people in civil society, citizens like us.
[Amit Varma]: And I think you see this playing out in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: after the outrage over Cambridge Analytica,
[Amit Varma]: Facebook has actually made efforts to do something about it
[Amit Varma]: that at various times,
[Amit Varma]: various platforms have been responsive to what consumers want.
[Amit Varma]: And I think as somebody made the point on the panel yesterday,
[Amit Varma]: part of the reason they do so is because advertisers are leaving,
[Amit Varma]: but advertisers are leaving because users are pissed off
[Amit Varma]: and therefore it comes back to civil society.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not so sure. I don't quite agree with this.
[Guest]: I think even in terms of the responses Zuckerberg gave,
[Guest]: I don't think Facebook is entirely being genuine.
[Guest]: If they're not.
[Guest]: I think there's ample proof, for example,
[Guest]: in terms of the fact that they moved users out of Ireland
[Guest]: with changes to the terms and conditions
[Guest]: in order to evade strong privacy regulations
[Unknown]: that are coming under the GDPR and the EU.
[Guest]: So I think we need to judge Facebook by their actions
[Amit Varma]: and I don't think we've seen enough there yet.
[Amit Varma]: My point is not that all private players are virtuous.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, private players aren't virtuous and not responsive,
[Amit Varma]: but the point is that do people have options?
[Amit Varma]: Now, your point is that if you want to go to a social networking platform,
[Amit Varma]: Facebook is like a monopoly. It's too big.
[Amit Varma]: My point is that Facebook is not competing with other social network platforms.
[Amit Varma]: They're competing with everything a person can do with their time
[Amit Varma]: and many people have left Facebook
[Amit Varma]: because they're appalled by what happened during the Cambridge Analytica thing.
[Amit Varma]: So they are choosing other options and that is a reaction of the market
[Amit Varma]: and ultimately that is the only regulation which will work
[Amit Varma]: because it's the only regulation which is non-coercive.
[Guest]: So look, Facebook's earned its monopoly just as Google's earned its monopoly,
[Guest]: just as Amazon has earned its monopoly.
[Amit Varma]: By serving customers well, but when they cease to do that
[Guest]: No, I don't think it's just I think it's not just serving customers well,
[Guest]: but it's also by building great products with large amounts of data collection,
[Guest]: observing smaller potential competitors, buying those competitors.
[Guest]: And so what's happening is that they are very quickly encroaching on each other's territory
[Guest]: and therefore like the point that I made in the last podcast was about the same thing,
[Guest]: that we are there's a battle between elephants going on
[Amit Varma]: and democracy is getting crushed in the process.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, democracy is getting crushed and that's a problem
[Amit Varma]: for which neither you nor I have immediate answers,
[Amit Varma]: but I think government regulation is the wrong one.
[Amit Varma]: But I think you're missing sort of the point I was trying to make is that Facebook,
[Amit Varma]: though I agreed with you when we spoke about the future of the internet,
[Amit Varma]: but in thinking a little deeper about it,
[Amit Varma]: Facebook is not a monopoly because they might dominate social networking,
[Amit Varma]: but to me Facebook is competing with many other players in how we spend our time.
[Amit Varma]: And people might even decide, like I have,
[Amit Varma]: that social networks are a waste of time, there are privacy risks, get out of them.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore they are in a very competitive marketplace
[Guest]: because everyone is competing for your time.
[Guest]: So, you know, this is a classic problem when you're looking at antitrust,
[Guest]: which is definition of the market.
[Guest]: And so you and I may have different definitions of the market
[Guest]: in the same way that you could say that
[Guest]: would you say that, let's say, if there is a single telecom operator in the market,
[Guest]: it is effectively not a monopoly because it is also communicating with
[Guest]: direct verbal communications or it's competing with telegraph and mail for communication.
[Guest]: So, definition of a market, I don't quite buy that argument of defining the market
[Amit Varma]: But telecom is kind of different because there's a function there.
[Guest]: I'm saying that that can be so social networking, right, and so spending your time.
[Guest]: If you're you can always define markets differently to suit different needs
[Guest]: and it's a valid thing to do,
[Guest]: but regulators have to look at it from the perspective of
[Guest]: how is this impacting a particular market.
[Guest]: So, for example, and also regulate for harm.
[Guest]: So, let's take WhatsApp, for example.
[Guest]: It was determined by the competition commission of India that
[Guest]: WhatsApp has a dominance in the Indian market when it comes to messaging.
[Guest]: They did not compare it with SMS because it deemed that rich text messaging,
[Guest]: which WhatsApp is, is different from what regular text messaging is.
[Guest]: But it also determined that WhatsApp had not abused its position of power.
[Guest]: Now, I think it's very clear that we are running the risk of many of these large platforms
[Guest]: abusing their position of power.
[Guest]: And like I said, then we cannot, as a nation,
[Guest]: we cannot depend on the benevolence of these platforms to maintain our freedom.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so let me
[Guest]: And so while states are constitutionally held to account or supposedly held to account,
[Guest]: there is no accountability framework in place here for platforms,
[Guest]: or for, and especially on these platforms when it comes to their control over free speech,
[Guest]: because the medium of speech is just as important for the transmission of free speech as a message.
[Guest]: And so therefore, we need an accountability framework for platforms.
[Amit Varma]: So here's the thing, here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: When we talk of the mistakes we made around benevolence,
[Amit Varma]: or when we assume that all government intervention will be somehow
[Guest]: I don't think so.
[Guest]: This is where I'm conflicted, right?
[Guest]: I understand the need for certain kind of an accountability framework to be put into place for platforms.
[Guest]: But I also am afraid of government intervention.
[Amit Varma]: Let me kind of make my point why I say that no matter what the problem is,
[Amit Varma]: government regulation is always the wrong answer.
[Amit Varma]: Because in this case, what it would do is government is not, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a benevolent beast that sits upon us and will act in our best interest.
[Amit Varma]: Government ultimately is a parcel of interest groups.
[Amit Varma]: And what happens when you give government power, when you give it the power to regulate something,
[Amit Varma]: is that where there is already a power imbalance,
[Amit Varma]: you are further empowering this specific set of interest groups,
[Amit Varma]: whether they be political or commercial or whatever, against others.
[Amit Varma]: And accountability in practice simply isn't there right now.
[Amit Varma]: And government failure is ubiquitous.
[Amit Varma]: Market failure is relatively rare, if it is there at all.
[Amit Varma]: And I would just say that all regulation that happens has to be non-coercive
[Amit Varma]: and has to come from civil society.
[Amit Varma]: If companies break the law, sure, prosecute them.
[Amit Varma]: That's the job of the state.
[Amit Varma]: But if they don't break the law, if you don't,
[Amit Varma]: if it's a question of preferences that I prefer this algorithm to that algorithm,
[Amit Varma]: there shouldn't be coercive pressure.
[Amit Varma]: It should be the voluntary actions of people which indicate what happened.
[Amit Varma]: And we can obviously disagree about how you define markets and monopolies.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think either of us have a solution to the problem
[Amit Varma]: that we've sort of been lamenting over this period of time.
[Guest]: I'm reminded of one solution which is regulating for harms
[Guest]: and for which laws already exist.
[Guest]: So if you can define certain harms and define the laws under which those are governed
[Guest]: and ensure that platforms, so for example, if it's hate speech,
[Guest]: if it's death threats, if it's intimidation, if it's incitement to violence,
[Guest]: even if it's criminal defamation, which I principally disagree with,
[Guest]: there are laws for that.
[Guest]: And I think it's just about then holding platforms to account for it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: I mean, we have existing laws which deal with a lot of those things.
[Guest]: Many of those laws we don't agree with.
[Guest]: But that's a way of regulating for harms.
[Guest]: So it is still regulation of these platforms.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not going beyond what already exists.
[Amit Varma]: See, Nikhil, when I talk about regulation, I mean it is distinct from the rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: It's understood that the state's job is to maintain the rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: If the company breaks the law in any way, then obviously the state does its job.
[Amit Varma]: But if it's going to sort of regulate and give licenses or say that,
[Amit Varma]: no, you have to bleep out the word breasts, it's not allowed,
[Amit Varma]: then that doesn't break any law.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of regulation is what I'm against.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not saying there should be a free-for-all where everybody does everything.
[Amit Varma]: I'm saying the rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: Again, I think that a lot of the laws that regulate free speech simply should not exist.
[Amit Varma]: And I know you agree with me on this.
[Amit Varma]: But the question is not about the rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: We need a state which has the capacity to maintain the rule of law as strongly and firmly as possible.
[Amit Varma]: We don't need regulation beyond that, which I think is what you're saying.
[Guest]: Yeah, I don't think we need regulation beyond that.
[Guest]: I also don't think we need to look at the Internet as distinct from what we already have.
[Guest]: But I think one argument which also keeps coming up is,
[Guest]: and from the traditional players,
[Guest]: is that the need for regulatory parity between offline and online,
[Guest]: in which case what we have and the problem that we are facing here
[Guest]: is that the traditional media is heavily regulated.
[Guest]: It is over-regulated.
[Guest]: So their argument is you need to, so there are two ways of doing it.
[Guest]: Either you reduce the restrictions on traditional media
[Guest]: or you increase the restrictions on the Internet for that regulatory parity
[Guest]: because I do also agree with this notion that you're effectively
[Guest]: advantaging the Internet versus traditional media.
[Amit Varma]: There's an analogue of this argument, and I think in my episode on Uber it had come up,
[Amit Varma]: that the black and yellows on the auto rickshaws will argue that we've been so heavily regulated for so long
[Amit Varma]: that why let Uber and Ola run free, to which my argument would be remove those regulations.
[Guest]: Exactly, and by the way, the same argument that also came up during net neutrality.
[Guest]: So, in fact, there's a playbook that the traditional players tend to follow.
[Guest]: The interesting thing here is that I was at a TRI open house
[Guest]: on uplinking and downlinking of TV channels about three odd weeks ago,
[Guest]: and there both Zee and Star argued for deregulation,
[Guest]: saying that we shouldn't be treated as broadcasters.
[Guest]: We are content aggregators, and we need to have the same freedom as online players do.
[Guest]: We need to have the same freedoms on traditional media platforms.
[Guest]: And the other thing that came in was interesting, was that all of these codes,
[Guest]: and like uplinking and downlinking are permissions, they're not licenses apparently.
[Guest]: And this was brought in because the government did not know how to tax
[Guest]: foreign channels that were being downlinked in India.
[Guest]: So, what was brought in as a means of getting revenue and effectively tax collection
[Guest]: also lent itself to being a means of controlling whether the channel goes live or not.
[Guest]: And we know that there are, for example, I mean, this is generally talked about in the media circles,
[Guest]: is how Raghav Behl's Quint and Bloomberg Quint, their licenses have been stuck for quite a while.
[Amit Varma]: This is again a point about, you know, they started regulating television from 2008
[Amit Varma]: and look at the result, Republic puts out whatever nonsense they feel like,
[Amit Varma]: and Bloomberg Quint is not allowed a license to broadcast.
[Amit Varma]: Don't give government that power, let everyone broadcast,
[Amit Varma]: and then if someone breaks the law, you punish them.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, let viewers decide which they have a right to do.
[Guest]: So I wrote about this during the Net Totality debate.
[Guest]: How do you start a billion TV channels on the internet?
[Guest]: Because there are no restrictions.
[Guest]: And that's, I think, what we need to also preserve.
[Amit Varma]: The ability for all of us to create
[Amit Varma]: I think someone in the ministry read that and said,
[Amit Varma]: Hey, look what this guy is saying, he's right, we need to do something.
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil, this is all your fault.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, I know you need to catch a flight and therefore we have a hot stop coming up.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll end this podcast here.
[Amit Varma]: I think we've both had a very enjoyable ramble during this session.
[Amit Varma]: And a long one at that.
[Amit Varma]: And a long one.
[Amit Varma]: And it's, no, I have to say it's always great fun talking to you
[Amit Varma]: because you're challenging me to think in new ways, giving me new information.
[Unknown]: And it's a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this is hopefully an ongoing sort of process.
[Amit Varma]: And thanks a lot for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thanks for having me on the show.
[Guest]: I don't think we'll run out of things to talk about,
[Guest]: given how active governments have been on the internet.
[Guest]: You know, this is the digital India age, in a sense, that's just beginning.
[Guest]: So unfortunately, we'll have a lot of things to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: Shubh shubh bolo.
[Amit Varma]: I hope we never need to meet again, but continue doing so for our own pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the scene and the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: check out another show by IVM Podcast,
[Amit Varma]: Symbolified, which is hosted by my good friends, Naren, Chuck, and Sriket.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: He bends down to test the warm water for his bath.
[Unknown]: He comes here to quench his thirst for a hot shower and some podcasts.
[Unknown]: You can witness how he enjoys having other people talk about cool stuff in his bathroom.
[Unknown]: Indeed, it helps him with his loneliness.
[Unknown]: You can find more of his pieces on ivmpodcast.com,
[Unknown]: your one-stop destination where you can check out the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening.